
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# SeuratToGO

## Description
The package processes Seurat's differential expression markers (after running FindAllMarkers() function in Seurat). This package reformats the to go through GO analysis using DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery). It also provides functions for analysis of DAVID output files. Currently, users have to manually separate the clusters in Seurat's markers dataframe using Excel and export it as a tab-delimited text file to upload to DAVID. They then have to manually combine all the DAVID output files (one for each clusters) to do further analysis. The R package includes the main components: DESCRIPTION, NAMESPACE, man subdirectory and R subdirectory. Additionally, LICENSE, README and subdirectories vignettes, tests, data and inst are also explored.
The `SeuratToGO` package was developed using `R version 4.3.1 (2023-06-16 ucrt)`, `Platform: x86_64-w64-mingw32/x64 (64-bit)` and `Running under: Windows 11 x64 (build 22621)`.

## Installation

You can install the development version of SeuratToGO from [GitHub](https://github.com/) with:
``` r
install.packages("devtools")
library("devtools")
devtools::install_github("dien-n-nguyen/SeuratToGO")
library("SeuratToGO")
```
## Overview

``` r
ls("package:SeuratToGO")
data(package = "SeuratToGO") 
browseVignettes("SeuratToGO")
```
`SeuratToGO` contains 5 functions.

1.  ***separate_clusters*** for separating the differentially expressed markers data frame generated by Seurat and exporting it as a tab-delimited text file.

2.  ***combine_david_files*** for combining all the DAVID output files into a list of data frames.

3.  ***get_top_processes*** to get the top processes for a specific cluster.

4.  ***get_all_top_processes*** to get the top processes for every cluster and consolidate them into one data frame

5.  ***top_processes_heatmap*** to generate a heatmap for all the top processes in each cluster

The package also contains a dataset called `pbmc_markers`, which contains differentially expressed markers generated using Seurat's tutorial. It also contains a zip folder called `david.zip` in `inst/extdata/` that contains example DAVID output files for users to use when following the vignette.

## Contributions

The author of the package is Dien Nguyen. The author wrote all 5 functions mentioned above. ***separate_clusters*** uses the package `magrittr` for piping and the package `dplyr` for filtering and selecting. ***get_top_processes*** uses `dplyr` to sort data frames. ***top_processes_heatmap*** uses the package `pheatmap` to generate the heatmap. The `pbmc_markers` dataset was generated by following Seurat's clustering tutorial. The DAVID output files were generated using the DAVID webserver.

## References

 - Bache S, Wickham H. 2022. magrittr: A Forward-Pipe Operator for R. https://magrittr.tidyverse.org, https://github.com/tidyverse/magrittr.

 - Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. 1995. Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological). 57(1):289–300. doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x.
   
 - Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, Satija R. 2018. Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat Biotechnol. 36(5):411–420. doi:10.1038/nbt.4096.

 - Kolde R. 2019. Pheatmap: pretty heatmaps. https://github.com/raivokolde/pheatmap
 
 - R Core Team. 2023. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/

 - Sherman BT, Hao M, Qiu J, Jiao X, Baseler MW, Lane HC, Imamichi T, Chang W. 2022. DAVID: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and functional annotation of gene lists (2021 update). Nucleic Acids Res. 50(W1):W216–W221. doi:10.1093/nar/gkac194.

 - Stuart T, Butler A, Hoffman P, Hafemeister C, Papalexi E, Mauck WM, Hao Y, Stoeckius M, Smibert P, Satija R. 2019. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell. 177(7):1888-1902.e21. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031.

 - - Wickham, H., Bryan, J. 2019. *R Packages* (2nd edition). Newton, Massachusetts: O'Reilly Media. https://r-pkgs.org/

 - Wickham H, François R, Henry L, Müller K, Vaughan D. 2023. dplyr: A Grammar of Data Manipulation. https://dplyr.tidyverse.org, https://github.com/tidyverse/dplyr.

## Acknowledgements

This package was developed as part of an assessment for 2019-2023 BCB410H: Applied Bioinformatics course at the University of Toronto, Toronto, CANADA. `SeuratToGO` welcomes issues, enhancement requests, and other contributions. To submit an issue, use the [GitHub issues](https://github.com/anjalisilva/SeuratToGO/issues). Many thanks to those who provided feedback to improve this package.
